docs: Add a hardware issues page under troubleshooting (#2360)
zmkfirmware/zmk: docs/docs/troubleshooting/hardware-issues.mdx

---
title: Hardware Issues
sidebar_label: Hardware Issues
description: Troubleshooting common hardware issues.
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

> export const TesterTabs = (props) => (

Reviewer: I think this page wants a small blurb at the top. Essentially, it can say that these are a set of non-comprehensive recommendations for identifying and solving common hardware problems encountered with DIY keyboards (intended to run ZMK?).

In addition, I am not sure how to exactly word this right now, but I think it's important to note that this is in an advisory capacity only. Maybe I am being too careful but I basically don't want users to think that ZMK project provides official hardware support of any kind. To that end, we should also urge users to contact the keyboard seller or manufacturer for any issues with non-DIY keyboards.

Author: I agree, forgot about making that note. Added a warning block.

    <Tabs
    groupId="testers"
    defaultValue="promicro"
    values={[
      { label: "Pro Micro Compatible Board", value: "promicro" },
      { label: "Seeed Studio XIAO Compatible Board", value: "xiao" },
    ]}
  >
    {/* eslint-disable-next-line */}
    {props.children}
  </Tabs>

);

export const PinTabs = (props) => (
    <Tabs
    groupId="pin-approaches"
    defaultValue="shield"
    values={[
      { label: "Tester Shield", value: "shield" },
      { label: "Multimeter", value: "multimeter" },
      { label: "Visual Inspection", value: "visual" },
    ]}
  >
    {/* eslint-disable-next-line */}
    {props.children}
  </Tabs>

);

## Pin Connections

### Identifying Issues

> There are three general approaches we recommend for identifying potential issues with microcontroller pins.

Reviewer: I think this can use a bit of expanding. At a high level, I don't think this is about identifying issues with microcontroller pins, the goal is to identify issues with the PCB in general. e.g. the multimeter tab clearly talks about checking diode connections, etc.

Reviewer: I think what would be good to document here is also the distinction made in https://docs.splitkb.com/hc/en-us/articles/360010552339-One-or-more-keys-don-t-work, i.e. one key not working vs. a row/column. This way the user can know where exactly to check with the multimeter/visual inspection approaches.

Author: Tried expanding on it a bit.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="xiao">
Find the `build.yaml` file in your `zmk-config` folder and add an additional `tester_xiao` build for your board:

```yml title="build.yaml"
include:
  # -------------------
  # Your keyboards here
  # -------------------
  - board: nice_nano_v2 # Replace with your board of use
    shield: tester_xiao
```

Save the file, commit the changes and push them to GitHub. Download the new firmware zip file build by the latest GitHub Actions job. In it you will find an additional `tester_xiao` UF2 image file. Flash this file to your board.

</TabItem>
</TesterTabs>
After flashing, open a text editor of your choice. Shorting a GPIO pin to ground (with e.g. a wire or tweezers, hold one end go ground and tap the pin with the other end) will now trigger the keyboard to send an informative message on which pins were triggered.
- If one pin was triggered, then the pin is working fine.
- If two were triggered at once, then these pins are shorted together on your device.

> - If no pin was triggered, try shorting a working pin to the pin you were trying to trigger to test if it is shorted to ground on your device. Otherwise, the pin is disconnected or broken.

Reviewer: I feel like this is not complete as a tab, e.g. once you identify one of the above two cases then you'd then want to use the multimeter to figure out where exactly the issue is.

As such, this tab might be better off as a subsection after the other two as a helper tool that can be used in conjunction with e.g. a multimeter.

Author: I feel like all three rely on each other for various things. I've left them as tabs, but added some references to the other methods in each tab.

For through-hole soldering specifically, the below infographic can be quite helpful.
![A helpful soldering infographic. Source: Sparkfun](https://cdn.sparkfun.com/assets/c/d/a/a/9/523b1189757b7fb36e8b456b.jpg)
:::tip
The above image was taken from [Sparkfun's guide on soldering through-hole components](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/how-to-solder-through-hole-soldering), which may be of use if you are less experienced with soldering.
:::

</TabItem>
</PinTabs>

### Resolving Issues

Many issues can be resolved by reworking the affected solder joints (Look up a tutorial on how to do so for your component). Sometimes a pin ends up broken though, in which case you will need to "bodge" (solder) a wire from a spare GPIO pin to the connection in need of a working pin.

Once you have done so, you will need to adjust the `kscan` of your keyboard slightly. The recommended approach to doing so is via your `zmk-config`:

1. Search through the files defining your board/shield for the definition of the keyboard's `kscan`. This is typically a`.dts`, `.dtsi`, or an `.overlay` file.

> 2. Make a file called `<my_keyboard>.overlay` file in your `zmk-config`, where `my_keyboard` is the name of the affected keyboard (part).

Reviewer: I believe this won't work for split shields right now, due to #1382.

Author: Turned it into modifying `.keymap` instead.

Reviewer: I think here we need some sort of clarification that .keymap applies to all parts of a split keyboard, so all parts would need the same bodge. For splits, do we have a choice other than documenting the per-part keymap workaround?

        , <&pro_micro  6 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro  9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        ;
    };
```

could have the pin `pro_micro 6` replaced with `gpio0 8`.

```dts title="<my_keyboard>.overlay"
&kscan0 {
        input-gpios
        = <&pro_micro  7 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&gpio0  8 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro  9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        ;
    };
```

You can then build and flash using your config as usual.

## Antenna

Under ideal conditions, a Bluetooth connection can be stable at even a 100 meter distance. However, there are many things which can affect the effective range of the antenna. In no particular order, the most common issues you will encounter are:

- Solid material near an antenna or between the two communicating antennas (Metal is _particularly_ bad)
- Interference from other nearby 2.4GHz connections
- The antenna makes use of malfunctioning hardware such as a [faulty oscillator](connection-issues.mdx#mitigating-a-faulty-oscillator)
- Not enough [power being provided to the antenna](connection-issues.mdx#unreliableweak-connection)

> 

Reviewer: We might want to note one of the most common cause of such issues here: missing external antennas for a motherboard or a PCIe wireless chipset.

Another more obscure cause (related to point 2): https://www.bluetoothandusb3.com/the-explanation

:::warning
These shields allow for easy testing of GPIO pins, but cannot be used to troubleshoot power pins.
:::
#### Acquiring a tester uf2

<TesterTabs>
<TabItem value="promicro">
Find the `build.yaml` file in your `zmk-config` folder and add an additional `tester_pro_micro` build for your board:

```yml title="build.yaml"
include:
  # -------------------
  # Your keyboards here
  # -------------------
  - board: nice_nano_v2 # Replace with your board of use
    shield: tester_pro_micro
```

Save the file, commit the changes and push them to GitHub. Download the new firmware zip file build by the latest GitHub Actions job. In it you will find an additional `tester_pro_micro` UF2 image file. Flash this file to your board.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="xiao">
Find the `build.yaml` file in your `zmk-config` folder and add an additional `tester_xiao` build for your board:

```yml title="build.yaml"
include:
  # -------------------
  # Your keyboards here
  # -------------------

>   - board: nice_nano_v2 # Replace with your board of use

Reviewer 2: This seems like a more appropriate default here.
```suggestion
  - board: seeeduino_xiao_ble # Replace with your board of use
```

:::

</TabItem>
</PinTabs>

### Resolving Issues

Many issues can be resolved by reworking the affected solder joints (Look up a tutorial on how to do so for your component). Sometimes a pin ends up broken though, in which case you will need to "bodge" (solder) a wire from a spare GPIO pin to the connection in need of a working pin.

Once you have done so, you will need to adjust the `kscan` of your keyboard slightly. The recommended approach to doing so is via your `zmk-config`:

1. Search through the files defining your board/shield for the definition of the keyboard's `kscan`. This is typically a`.dts`, `.dtsi`, or an `.overlay` file.
2. Add a [phandle](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/dts/phandles.html) to your `.keymap` pointing at your `kscan`, copying in the property of your `kscan` where the broken GPIO pin appears. Depending on your `kscan` driver this could be `input-gpios`, `row-gpios`, etc.
3. Edit the node to replace the old GPIO key with the new. For example:

```dts

> &kscan0 {
>         input-gpios
>         = <&pro_micro  7 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
>         , <&pro_micro  6 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
>         , <&pro_micro  9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
>         ;
>     };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
&kscan0 {
    input-gpios
        = <&pro_micro 7 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro 6 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro 9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        ;
};
```

```

> could have the pin `pro_micro 6` replaced with `gpio0 8`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could have the pin `&pro_micro 6` (D6 in the [Pro Micro pinout](../development/hardware-integration/new-shield.mdx#shield-overlays)) replaced with `&gpio0 8` (P0.08 for nRF MCUs).
```

```dts title="<my_keyboard>.overlay"

> &kscan0 {
>         input-gpios
>         = <&pro_micro  7 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
>         , <&gpio0  8 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
>         , <&pro_micro  9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
>         ;
>     };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
&kscan0 {
    input-gpios
        = <&pro_micro 7 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&gpio0 8 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro 9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        ;
};
```

```

You can then build and flash using your config as usual.

:::note
If the affected pin is not in your `kscan`, you will want to copy over and overwrite the node that it is in instead.
:::

## Antenna

Under ideal conditions, a Bluetooth connection can be stable at even a 100 meter distance. However, there are many things which can affect the effective range of the antenna. In no particular order, the most common issues you will encounter are:

> - Solid material near an antenna or between the two communicating antennas (Metal is _particularly_ bad)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Solid material near an antenna or between the two communicating antennas (metal is _particularly_ bad)
```

- Interference from other nearby 2.4GHz connections
- The antenna makes use of malfunctioning hardware such as a [faulty oscillator](connection-issues.mdx#mitigating-a-faulty-oscillator)
- Not enough [power being provided to the antenna](connection-issues.mdx#unreliableweak-connection)

> - A missing external antenna

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A missing external antenna for motherboard-integrated or PCIe wireless adapters
```

- Interference from [USB 3 devices](https://www.bluetoothandusb3.com/the-explanation)

> It is expected that your antenna will have some interference - hence why most household devices using Bluetooth have an effective range of 5-10 meters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is expected that your antenna will have some interference -- hence why most household devices using Bluetooth have an effective range of 5-10 meters.
```

### Identifying & Resolving Issues

Troubleshooting antenna issues can only really be done via trial and error.

A good initial approach is:

> 1. Make sure you have firmware flashed to your device that has BLE enabled, with at least one Bluetooth profile free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Make sure you have firmware flashed to your device that has BLE enabled, with at least one [Bluetooth profile](../features/bluetooth.md#profiles) free and no uncleared profiles previously paired to the host device.
```

---
title: Hardware Issues
sidebar_label: Hardware Issues
description: Troubleshooting common hardware issues.
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

export const TesterTabs = (props) => (
    <Tabs
    groupId="testers"
    defaultValue="promicro"
    values={[
      { label: "Pro Micro Compatible Board", value: "promicro" },
      { label: "Seeed Studio XIAO Compatible Board", value: "xiao" },
    ]}
  >
    {/* eslint-disable-next-line */}
    {props.children}
  </Tabs>

);

export const PinTabs = (props) => (
    <Tabs
    groupId="pin-approaches"
    defaultValue="shield"
    values={[
      { label: "Tester Shield", value: "shield" },
      { label: "Multimeter", value: "multimeter" },
      { label: "Visual Inspection", value: "visual" },
    ]}
  >
    {/* eslint-disable-next-line */}
    {props.children}
  </Tabs>

);

:::warning
This page contains _general advice_ for troubleshooting hardware issues. ZMK **does not** provide any sort of hardware support. If the below points are unable to resolve your problem, contact your vendor/manufacturer for assistance.

> You can contact ZMK for assistance with resolving firmware issues _after_ resolving your hardware issues, if your vendor/manufacturer is unable to provide said support.

Author: Rephrasing this is a good idea, and reminding about warranty/support is also good. I'm not sold on remarking that the community is happy to help - part of my motivation for writing this page was out of frustration with the aliexpress vendors essentially using the ZMK discord as free tech support, though others may see it differently...

> You can contact ZMK for assistance with resolving firmware issues _after_ resolving your hardware issues, if your vendor/manufacturer is unable to provide said support.

Reviewer: Maybe a slight wording change like "the community might be able to provide help"? Less committal but also reflecting the reality.

> You can contact ZMK for assistance with resolving firmware issues _after_ resolving your hardware issues, if your vendor/manufacturer is unable to provide said support.

Author: Tried rewriting - let me know what you think.

:::

## Electrical Net Connections

Problems with your electrical net can manifest itself in a number of ways. The most common way is through one or more keyswitches not working, often an entire row or column. If this is the case, then (assuming you have access to it) you could use your keyboard's schematic to help identify which pins you need to check.

### Identifying Issues

There are three general approaches we recommend for identifying potential issues with the electrical net (pins & connections between components) of your device.

<PinTabs>
<TabItem value="shield">
ZMK comes with built-in "tester" shields for [pro micro combatible boards](https://cdn.sparkfun.com/assets/9/c/3/c/4/523a1765757b7f5c6e8b4567.png) and [Seeed Studio XIAO combatible boards](https://files.seeedstudio.com/wiki/Seeeduino-XIAO/img/Seeeduino-XIAO-pinout-1.jpg).
:::warning
These shields allow for easy testing of GPIO pins, but cannot be used to troubleshoot power pins.
:::

> #### Acquiring a tester uf2

Author: Good points. The main reason for the warning box is to double down on the point to be aware of power vs gpio pins, but I think considering this I'll add that note further down as a danger box. Anything to stop someone from shorting 5V to a GPIO pin while trying out the tester.

Here is a checklist for you to use while probing your device with the multimeter:

- Are any of the pins shorted that shouldn't be shorted?
- Are all the diodes/components working and in the correct orientation?
- Does pressing a keyswitch close the affected circuit?
- When the device is plugged in, are all the pins at the expected voltage? (Typically ground or 3V3, which is where depends on the design and firmware)
- Are there any failed solder joints?

Do note that as you need to have access to both sides of a connection, you cannot use a multimeter to troubleshoot pins which are underneath a chip. If the chip in question is your MCU, then you should use a tester shield instead.

:::tip
To check a solder joint, it is best to probe the two points either side of it if you can. For example:
![A section of a schematic with a particular joint marked in green](../assets/troubleshooting/multimeter/schematic_probe_example.png)

> To check if the joint marked in red is faulty, you would first check that the diode is working, and then test whether the joint is faulty by probing the two purple joints. If you get the same results as probing the diode directly, then there is no problem with the joint.

Reviewer: I think it'd be better if you removed the tip box altogether. I think the image could be even smaller, but that seems to require using the html element: https://stackoverflow.com/a/74158469

> To check if the joint marked in red is faulty, you would first check that the diode is working, and then test whether the joint is faulty by probing the two purple joints. If you get the same results as probing the diode directly, then there is no problem with the joint.

Author: I wrapped the image and lower text into a details box. What do you think of that as a solution?

> To check if the joint marked in red is faulty, you would first check that the diode is working, and then test whether the joint is faulty by probing the two purple joints. If you get the same results as probing the diode directly, then there is no problem with the joint.

Reviewer: I think it's a good solution, thanks. Do you want to keep the tip admonition box around it?

> To check if the joint marked in red is faulty, you would first check that the diode is working, and then test whether the joint is faulty by probing the two purple joints. If you get the same results as probing the diode directly, then there is no problem with the joint.

Reviewer: On a second look, it seems good to have it since it is kind of a specific tangent.

---
title: Hardware Issues
sidebar_label: Hardware Issues
description: Troubleshooting common hardware issues.
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

export const TesterTabs = (props) => (
    <Tabs
    groupId="testers"
    defaultValue="promicro"
    values={[
      { label: "Pro Micro Compatible Board", value: "promicro" },
      { label: "Seeed Studio XIAO Compatible Board", value: "xiao" },
    ]}
  >
    {/* eslint-disable-next-line */}
    {props.children}
  </Tabs>

);

export const PinTabs = (props) => (
    <Tabs
    groupId="pin-approaches"
    defaultValue="shield"
    values={[
      { label: "Tester Shield", value: "shield" },
      { label: "Multimeter", value: "multimeter" },
      { label: "Visual Inspection", value: "visual" },
    ]}
  >
    {/* eslint-disable-next-line */}
    {props.children}
  </Tabs>

);

:::warning

> This page contains _general advice_ for troubleshooting hardware issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page contains _general and non-comprehensive advice_ for troubleshooting hardware issues.
```

2. Add a [phandle](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/build/dts/phandles.html) to your `.keymap` pointing at your `kscan`, copying in the property of your `kscan` where the broken GPIO pin appears. Depending on your `kscan` driver this could be `input-gpios`, `row-gpios`, etc.
3. Edit the node to replace the old GPIO key with the new. For example:

```dts
&kscan0 {
    input-gpios
        = <&pro_micro 7 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro 6 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro 9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        ;
};
```

could have the pin `&pro_micro 6` (D6 in the [Pro Micro pinout](../development/hardware-integration/new-shield.mdx#shield-overlays)) replaced with `&gpio0 8` (P0.08 for nRF MCUs).

```dts title="<my_keyboard>.keymap"
&kscan0 {
    input-gpios
        = <&pro_micro 7 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&gpio0 8 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        , <&pro_micro 9 (GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW | GPIO_PULL_UP)>
        ;
};
```

You can then build and flash using your config as usual.

:::note
If the affected pin is not in your `kscan`, you will want to copy over and overwrite the node that it is in instead.
:::

> ## Antenna

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Wireless Connectivity
```
This seems a bit awkward to call antenna, what about this?

Author: Made it a bit longer even, to avoid overlap with the connectivity issues page.

Under ideal conditions, a Bluetooth connection can be stable at even a 100 meter distance. However, there are many things which can affect the effective range of the antenna. In no particular order, the most common issues you will encounter are:

- Solid material near an antenna or between the two communicating antennas (metal is _particularly_ bad)
- Interference from other nearby 2.4GHz connections
- The antenna makes use of malfunctioning hardware such as a [faulty oscillator](connection-issues.mdx#mitigating-a-faulty-oscillator)
- Not enough [power being provided to the antenna](connection-issues.mdx#unreliableweak-connection)
- A missing external antenna for motherboard-integrated or PCIe wireless adapters
- Interference from [USB 3 devices](https://www.bluetoothandusb3.com/the-explanation)
- Keyboard design flaws, including
  - Using low frequency nRF52840 pins for high frequency purposes such as WS2812 RGB LEDs
  - Improperly tuned antenna

It is expected that your antenna will have some interference -- hence why most household devices using Bluetooth have an effective range of 5-10 meters.

### Identifying & Resolving Issues

> Troubleshooting antenna issues can only really be done via trial and error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Troubleshooting wireless issues can only really be done via trial and error.
```
Related to previous point

A good initial approach is:

1. Make sure you have firmware flashed to your device that has BLE enabled, with at least one [Bluetooth profile](../features/bluetooth.md#profiles) free and no uncleared profiles previously paired to the host device.
2. Select the free profile.
3. Remove as many physical objects between your ZMK device and a host device as possible.
4. Switch off as many other nearby wireless devices as possible.
5. Hold the antenna as close to the host's antenna as possible, minimizing material near the ZMK antenna and between the two antennas.

If your host cannot find the ZMK device under these conditions, then your antenna likely has a more significant problem and you should contact your vendor, manufacturer, or designer.

> If your host _can_ find the ZMK device, then you can trial and error solutions to the four points above. The previously linked documentation sections may be of use for that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your host _can_ find the ZMK device, then you can narrow down the solution to one or more of the points above. The previously linked documentation sections may be of use for that.
```
